I would like to warmly welcome my next guest, Ian McGilchrist. Ian is a psychiatrist,
a neuroscience researcher, an author, a philosopher, a literary scholar. He is an
associate, a fellow of the Green Templeton College, Oxford, a fellow of the Royal College
of Psychiatrists, a fellow of the Royal Society of Arts, a consultant emeritus of the Bethlehem
and Maudsley Hospital in London. Professor McGilchrist came into prominence with the publication of
his tome, The Master and His Emissary, The Divided Brain, and The Making of the Western World,
which is how I came to be exposed to his work. And then 14 years later, his most recent book
titled The Matter with Things, Our Brains, Our Delusions, and The Unmaking of the World.
This was one of those conversations that was both profound, wise, and intimate. I had never
met or spoken with Ian before the camera was turned on, and I learned continually during this
podcast, and I immediately felt a kinship with this man who deeply cares about the state of the
world and has spent a lifetime researching what I think is the most important aspect of our situation,
which is the human brain and our disconnect from the types of experience and perspectives of our
ancestors. I hope you enjoy this episode as much as I did. Please welcome Dr. Ian McGilchrist.
Dr. Ian McGilchrist, good to meet you, sir. Very good to be with you, Nate. Thank you for asking me along.
I've been making it a habit when I say hello to people in other countries that I greet them in
their language, but since you're in Scotland, I didn't know if I should just start swearing or
how to greet someone in Scottish. Any kind of suitable animal noise that suggests some
appreciation will do. Let me bring you up to speed here. Some things you might not know.
20 years ago, I started my PhD. I left Wall Street because I could see how the pieces were
starting to connect and that humans were having a real problem with climate change, the environment,
resources, et cetera. I started my PhD with a British psychiatrist on my advisory committee
by the name of Dr. Peter Weibrow. We were going to look at why we don't so much face
an environmental problem or a resource problem, but a mismatch of the human brain with our current
situation. Then I ended up diving into energy and I left that aside, but reading your books and,
to be honest, I've had them for two months and I've not made my way through them. I called Daniel
Schmacktenberger and said, I'm interviewing Ian McGillchrist next week. Could you leave me some
pointers? He left me a 19-minute boxer that I would need a librarian to translate, but it seems
that all along you have been talking about the same thing, which is that our brains are driving
much of what's going on. I don't want to rehash what you've done on lots of other excellent
podcasts and videos and you sent me that animated video, which I think is great. I want to apply it
to this superorganism environmental dynamic, but for those people who are not familiar with your
work, could you give kind of an elevator pitch but a longish one on the core points in your two
main books, The Master and his Emissary and The Matter With Things, if you would?
Yes, I can do that. I think the first thing that I would point out is I don't believe that the brain
is driving these things in some sort of way. I believe that there are many causes of the crisis
that we're in now, some of them economic, some of them political, some of them sociological and it
has many aspects. So I'm not saying it's the brain that causes the crisis we're in, but the brain
has become hijacked in a way by the way we're thinking now and that that's important for us
to realise. So in those books, essentially they start from a few interesting questions which puzzle
me a lot and we're not talked about in my medical training. Why is the brain divided at all? If it's
this supercomputer, why waste computing power by dividing it into two chunks in this way?
I don't believe it is a computer by the way. I can tell you a half a dozen reasons why it's not
like a computer, but nonetheless, why is it divided? Why is it asymmetrical? And why for most of the
history of the brain has there been no band of fibres connecting them? It was a mammalian invention,
the corpus callosum, it's called the body of fibres at the base of the brain that connects the
two hemispheres. But the divided brain goes back millions of years, hundreds of millions of years
and the asymmetry of the brain goes back to the very earliest neural networks. Why?
And the answer to this is simple in a way, at least I think and nobody's suggested anything that goes
near it and explaining why we have this arrangement and nobody suggested I'm wrong to say this.
It stems from a Darwinian problem of survival. How do you pay narrow attention to something
that you need to manipulate to something you need to pick up if you're a bird get that seed
quickly, if you're a predator to catch your prey, if you want to pick up sticks or fashion tools,
you've got to have this very manipulative cast of mind in which you're going to target that
whatever it is that you know is important to you in detail. And that requires a very focused
narrow beam attention. If that's the only kind of attention you pay, then you will end up being
someone else's lunch while you're getting your own because you need to be on the lookout for
predators. You need to be on the lookout for your conspecifics, for your mate, for your offspring
that also need to be protected and fed. So the only way in which you can pay these two kinds of
attention at once is to have two neuronal masses each capable of disposing a kind of attention to
the world. One narrow targeted piecemeal, the other uncommitted, broad, sustained and vigilant.
Now that may not sound like a big deal, but the fact that there's a different way of attending
changes everything because how you attend governs what you find. And so effectively these two ways
of attending to the world build completely different images takes whatever you like to call
them of the world in our minds. I hesitate over image because it makes it sound it's just visual,
but I mean in every modality. And what are those differences? Well, there are about a dozen of
them that are isolable. But let me just say this, in the left hemisphere the world seems to be made
up of little bits that have no context, no meaning, they're isolated, atomistic, and if they have any
meaning at all it's because we put them together in some way for some purpose of our own. They're
abstracted from their embodied nature, from their physical context, relatively devoid of any kind
of meaning including emotional, spiritual meaning. And what you have there is a pretty much an
inanimate and mechanical world, a dead world. The right hemisphere on the other hand sees
the broad picture and it sees that everything is ultimately connected with everything else.
That unlike these fixed frames of the left hemisphere everything can be seen to be in
constant movement, nothing ever stops moving in the entire universe. It sees that everything is
what it is only in the context that it's in. So once you've isolated it you've lost most of its
meaning. It sees that, for example, the animals and the people that we see around us are embodied
and that's a very important part of their nature. It sees that the inner life, it sees what is
implicit whereas the left hemisphere sees only the explicit. As a result the left hemisphere
doesn't understand things like tone of voice, facial expressions, bodily gestures, puns,
metaphors, myths, narratives, rites, rituals, anything that isn't just the kind of thing you
could teach a machine by putting in a word box and a kind of syntax box it doesn't really get.
And it's also super confident that it's right. In fact because it knows so very little it thinks
it knows everything. There's something in psychology I'm sure you know called the Dunning-Kruger effect
which dictates that the less you know the more you think you know and the right hemisphere however
sees a great deal and has arranged things so that it can farm out the mere procedural work to the
left hemisphere so that it doesn't get distracted from its job of seeing the overall picture.
So these two work very well in harmony as long as the left hemisphere observes its role as an
adjunct to the right hemisphere. It sees less but it can do certain things very quickly in the way
that a PC can. I mean the PC doesn't know what you know you put data in it doesn't understand them
it spews stuff out it doesn't understand it you do the understanding the PC just does it quickly
and the left hemisphere is like as I say I resist the idea that the brain is a computer but just
for this purpose of this metaphor the left hemisphere is like the personal PC of the right
hemisphere that is the one that we can trust because it's more in touch with reality in every respect.
And so in I expound that to begin with in the master and his emissary and I do it at greater
length in the first part of the matter with things. In the second part of the master and his emissary I
say how has this changed if it has changed over the course of western civilization because I see
that around us we seem to be very much living in a world of the kind that the left hemisphere sees
unsophisticated untempered by what the right hemisphere could teach us. So has it always been
like this and my answer to that is no over the history of the west there have been three points
at which civilization seemed to embody the best of the two working together fruitfully.
And I'd say these moments are around the sixth century BC in ancient Greece around the year
dot in Rome and around the 1415 century the beginning of the Renaissance in Europe.
And at those moments we see something flourishing in the arts in the sciences everywhere because
these hemispheres are feeding one another but in every case after a period of time
things seem to fossilize they become more mechanical more hierarchical more stereotype more
bureaucratic more legalistic and the imaginative part that helps us see and understand the world
we live in begins to erode and the civilization collapses it collapsed in Greece it collapsed in
Rome and it's collapsing for us now I believe. In the matter with things I do a little bit more
and I look more at the philosophical implications of this so I look at the way what neurology can
teach us about the hemispheres what philosophy can teach us about the hemispheres and what physics
can tell us about the world that we live in and I find that these three parts lead from different
very different starting points to the same picture of the world which is very close to the one the
right hemisphere has of something that is never fixed and certain that is always evolving that
is in process that is complex beautiful rich interconnected animate rather than the dead
world of mechanistic reductionism so that's it in a nutshell there's a lot more to say but you
can ask me if you're interested. I am interested and I've got like 14 prepared questions for you
and I think I'm just going to scrap those and ask you whatever comes to my mind because I have a
ton of questions so the left brain puts the bits together and creates a narrative that suits us
right so it uses the left brain in kind of a internal authority bias sort of way and dominates
the narrative which could explain why there's so many people that are cocksure that they understand
the world and trump is right or biden is right or you know climate change is a hoax or we're all
going extinct that it gives people like a overly self-confident because it helps themselves in
their own fitness. I think the left hemisphere envisages only the sort of thing it can know
and it knows how to put things together and make something and so it decides that the world must
be made like that from little bit and in doing so it completely misunderstands its nature and it
produces that kind of cocksure certainty which is surely the sign of a lack of wisdom one of the
signs of wisdom is that one feels less certain that one knows rather than more certain that one
knows in general so yeah I do think that yeah. Did you ever have a chance to watch uh we were
emailing a couple months back the the latest episode with Daniel Schmockenberger and I on
artificial intelligence where we really it was only a little bit on AI it was mostly about how
humans have had narrow boundary criteria nation states economic systems have outcompeted
wide boundary more wisdom types of systems. Did you ever listen to that and what do you think
about that? Intelligence versus wisdom is a little bit of a narrow boundary goal versus a wide
boundary goal. I did listen to part of it but I didn't listen to all of it and I'm very interested
in Daniel's work and he and I are going to do a couple of things together but what I'd say about
that is that first of all human beings are not just the squalid competitive apes that we are
made out to be we have many many interesting traits we are social animals we know how to
sacrifice for another and indeed the history of evolution is as much a history of cooperation
as it is of competition competition is very important of course but the cooperation has
been neglected and we do know how to cooperate and when we're working well both the hemisphere
cooperate with one another and we cooperate with one another so the history I mean the
history of the west is the one that I know best I haven't attempted to write about the history of
the east though I suspect it will tell a different story until very recently when it seems to become
occidentalized in the most lamentable way taking all our worst sins upon it but anyway
and yeah I mean I think that is right wisdom is always going to be relatively rare and involves
a lot of things it involves the putting together of a life well lived and the experience that comes
from that with an understanding of history a sense of the spiritual and an ability to aggregate
information but at the moment I'd say that information is triumphant over a true understanding
and an understanding is what intelligence requires and means so that much of the time
we're amassing information and we kind of know in a technical way certain things we probably know
more in that sense than than humanity has ever known but we're also in my view less wise than
humanity has ever been this fact that we can know things and can do things has gone to our heads
and made us hubristic vain and ridiculous because we think we can solve everything but we don't
understand a half of what we've got hold of here so I think AI is a problem yeah so how
how does that map from an individual to a culture because as individuals we have left
hemispheres and right hemispheres and we have a corpus callosum that divides them
and is getting larger over time implying that there's some narrative control going on
but our culture doesn't have a left or a right hemisphere so is it just the proportion of the
population that is kind of tilted in one direction that periodically you said there were a couple
historical cultures that flourished because they had more of a balanced
what's the difference between individuals population and the whole culture with respect
to this phenomenon yes it's a reasonable question and of course I'm not suggesting that
physically the brain has changed enormously since 2000 years ago it will have changed a bit
because it's always involving but it's not that I'm referring to and it's that we use the brain
in in different ways we can choose to listen to one part of the brain more than another
and I think that what happens it as a society becomes a powerful civilization a number of
things happen one is that it over reaches itself either in terms of its territory or its military
and economic power and in doing that it needs to be able to control or thinks it needs to be able
to control a vast ever vast panoply of of elements in human life and to do that it needs to simplify
to roll out as we say a bureaucratic system and so forth so as a civilization becomes too large
and over reaches itself it moves more and more towards a kind of left hemisphere thinking
that helps it with the map the theory the diagram of life rather than the actual business of life
and I think the other thing that happens well there are many things that happened I think
there are about half a dozen that I refer to in the preface to the matter with things
um sorry the preface to the martian is emissary and take much further in the matter with things
but one is something that the great philosopher A. N. Whitehead said that a civilization thrives
until it over analyzes itself and I think that what's happening in our world is we're we don't
really live connected so much to nature we don't live connected to a spiritual tradition we don't
live connected to our history and culture we our art has become too intellectualized it's become too
conceptual not powerful visceral and metaphoric in its nature as most great art is and so we've
been cut loose and we're all kind of at a loss and when we try to talk to one another across
these spaces we tend to talk in very theoretical terms so people talk about a theory of politics a
theory of economics and a theory of how people behave and so usually this is inaccurate over
simple and so it's that that gets us into this frame of mind because the left hemisphere's message
is money for old road it's incredibly simple we're just apes that compete for territory money and power
that's the left hemisphere's knowledge because let me put it this way the left hemisphere's
resolve debt is to make us powerful to help us grab things it controls the right hand which
from most of us is the one which we do the grabbing and the manipulating and it helps us maintain power
but all the rest of the understanding of everything else that humans are capable of the life of
the spirit the life of of of morality of beauty of goodness of truth all these things are somehow
left out of this picture and become somehow marginalized or trivialized as they have done
I believe in our culture at the moment and so why I wrote the matter with things was because I could
see that we all agree there is something that is the matter with things I mean very few people think
everything's going fine right now but it's also a notice of the fact that we overvalue
matter in the most simple sense I actually say that materialists are not people who overvalue
matter they're people who undervalue matter because matter is a very extraordinary thing
matter is wonderful but this kind of simple idea of matter is what we we tend to overestimate the
power of the consciousness and the spirit the mind is is somehow a secondary secretion of
matter which it cannot be and that we've made a world up out of things which is how the left hand
is here puts things together whereas I believe the importance in in everything lies in relationship
not in what we call the things themselves that are related
So many thoughts Ian let me let me go off on a tangent here
I would say that historically the animus religions would probably have a better
balance between the left and the right hemispheres and the story that I've put together with the
energy hungry emergent cultural super organism kind of started with the agricultural revolution
10 to 12,000 years ago which was in many ways a fall from grace because we were living close
to limits but we were living with the right brain appreciation of the relationships with ourselves
with our surroundings with nature with other species is it possible that as the population
expanded and then exploded that our world is so full of things and stories about the things
and advertising about the things that the left brain has no choice but to intercede and take over
I'm just speculating what do you what do you think about all that
Well I think it's very tempting for the left hemisphere to think that it's going to understand
these things but that is part of the problem I think you're right about animistic cultures
I'm not saying that animism is you know the answer to philosophy not in the least
but I think it's a way of understanding something that's very important which is the
relationship of life to the world at large including things that are in our purview that
we wouldn't normally call animate in fact if you suppress the left hemisphere which you can do
experimentally people see things that we would call inanimate sometimes as animate
and if you do the opposite and suppress the right hemisphere they begin to see
even people and animals as like machines or pieces of furniture so I think animism is an expression
of a kind of vision that we could learn from but I think subsequent philosophy has gone much
further in that and I don't know if we want to go there but I hold a view called panentheism
which is that God is in everything and everything is in God and I think that in fact the great loss
in our time is of any spiritual or moral compass any sense of our groundedness in a cosmos that is
beautiful has a direction to it and has meaning in it I mean we're taught that we just paint these
things on the walls of ourselves to cheer ourselves up that we invent meaning and values
and purpose I don't believe this at all in fact the long book the matter with things is
demonstrating exactly how wrong that is and that in fact we don't invent them but we discover them
we literally find them or fail to find them depending on who we are is it possible that
eight billion well look before I ask that you just said you can suppress the left hemisphere
experimentally is that like in a medical situation or can you are there some parlor tricks you can
do at home because that might be a good thing if we all did those experiments as they used to say
in those films don't attempt this at home okay okay yeah um I'm talking about um I'm talking
effectively about something called transcranial magnetic stimulation which is a a process that
will be done in a in a hospital setting or at least in a in a yes in a clinical setting
Ian let me tell you a story let me tell you a story three years ago I was chainsawing on my
property here and I had to crawl under the horse fence to get to the tree and it's electrified
and the electrical fence hit me squarely on the top of my head and it hurt so badly
for five seconds for the next five hours I was in this like zen state where I felt connected
to everything I didn't have like a compulsion to check my phone it was weird and I just always
wondered if that was like a miniature version of what you're describing
but it's a wonderful story thank you I wouldn't like to say really really but I mean of course
just in case anybody's listening who who knows somebody or has ECT it it's done with an anaesthetic
now and you're not aware of it so it's all fine but okay in any case yet passing electric
current through the brain surely does make some changes um yeah where were we we were talking
about yeah you can isolate one at a time but not you know not to try it at home yeah and and
you asked me that question probably for some reason is there a test that you could give people
other than walking into a cocktail party and talking to someone for five year five minutes and
realizing that they're pretty much left brain dominant but is there is there a test like a
psychological test that can see where people are on on behaviorally on this spectrum or is it not
that refined no I mean there are some terrible things on the internet that tell you whether
you're left or right brain but just forget that forget most of everything that's on the internet
unless it comes from me on this topic because it's going to repeat the awful old the awful
old canards about about the the two hemispheres but no there are proper
neuropsychological instruments as we call them that can be administered questionnaires
and can score people but again largely these things were generated before the huge body
of work that I have done and is the 2000 pages or more of these two books together
which really has completely changed the landscape on hemisphere difference most of the things that
people used to say are wrong and there are one or two things that are broadly right but so it is
important and you can tell yes but I mean especially for psychiatrists you can you can tell fairly
quickly if somebody's autistic and autism is a condition which has different manifestations
I think there are autism rather than one simple autism but the communist form of autism is rather
like trying to understand the world on the basis of your left hemisphere alone here's another question
and I'm going to run out of questions I mean I won't run out of questions so I've been involved
in this systems ecology group for 20 years I've got hundreds and hundreds of contacts who live
around the world who are looking at how energy, money, climate change, biodiversity, politics,
anthropology fit together into cohesive story I would say that relative to the standard population
the preponderance of people with Asperger's or something similar is very much high in this group
of people and I wonder if it's something to do with the ability to separate out the noise
which the left brain is very good at focusing on and stepping back and looking at the whole
picture total speculation just wondering if you have any input there. Well I wouldn't want to be
dogmatic and I think that might come into it but there are a couple of other things that come to
mind and one is the capacity for systematization of a linear and left hemisphere congruent kind
which people with Asperger's or autism have and the other is something I have noticed and was
noticed by others particularly by an important German psychiatrist called Kretschmer in the 1930s
that people who are either come from families of the printer either schizophrenia or autism
or Asperger's the subjects often are very focused on doing good in the abstract but are often not
very good at being warm or kind to individual people so they embrace you know a brilliant idea
that we're going to make the world like this and of course we need people like that but we also need
to have them have their feet planted firmly on the ground because as is well known the most
desperate homicidal and tyrannical regimes in the history of the world started out with people
having an idea how to make humanity better and forcing them to be better.
There are ways that we can expand our boundaries of empathy and care and start to recognize that
we're part of a whole that we're related to all other life on the planet that this is the one blue
green oasis in a dark cold universe and I think we are approaching a species level conversation
so your work I actually think is foundational to that that we have to shift from a me to an us
somehow. Now there's been in the last couple years a lot of movement towards psychedelics like
ayahuasca or five MEO DMT from toad or mushrooms or non-drugs like chanting or rave parties or just
going out in nature but can these substances access the relational skills of the right brain
or what do you think about all that? Well in brief the psychedelics which to me are relatively
uninteresting though they can indeed have lasting effects on people I know from personal testimonies
of people not my own that this can happen. I don't think that it's liberating the right hemisphere
and I explain why I don't think that's what's happening in the matter with things I think
probably what is happening is that the frontal lobes are being suppressed and the frontal lobes are
if you like the filters that by their effect of inhibiting the more posterior cortex shape our
reality by making sense of it and so when you take them off you get a flood of stimuli with no particular
you know way of having filtered that perhaps in the absence of filtering by the frontal cortex
we are more open to spiritual messages but I think that there are very many other ways that we can
much more sound ways you know it's being very much promoted psychedelics as the answer to
depression and other things but the reason for that is that it will cost the pharmaceutical
industry absolutely nothing to market these substances they're already known and they will
have they'll never need to work again because they can just make money out of providing these
purified substances and so they are very much skewing the the dialogue on this and what's not
known so widely is that you can have terrible experiences using psychedelics which are
devastating to your psyche so you're playing with fire so I would like to take the conversation
away from that and to the things that really really do matter if you're happy with that which are
relating to a society to a social group relating to nature and relating to
some whatever you like to call it higher power divine ground the sacred these things are not
just my opinion that they're important for us there is vast research that shows that they are
very important for mental well-being for physical well-being well-being for cognitive skill
and for the cohesion of a society so clearly the sacred or the belief in any deity or god
or anything like that has to emanate from the right hemisphere so
right now to me it seems like the belief in religion is is waning as the driving force
relative to the last couple hundred years but also right now the belief in economic growth
or the you know capitalism and economic growth has become a religion of sorts
so neither of those I mean that's what our sacred is now and you don't know much about my work Ian but
I'm a champion for the 10 million other species we share this planet with and I deeply view the
natural world as sacred and that's what's our calling right now is we kind of had to go through
this last 200 years of Las Vegas smorgasbord uh energy um orgy of of of things uh to maybe recognize
whoa uh maybe the next technology is inner tech in our minds um towards this this sacred
destination uh what what do you think about all that
well first of all I'm I you know that that I believe in the importance of the other living
elements of our of our planet um and even even things that we think of as inanimate and exploits
have their value and their place so I wholly agree with you we're we're seeing from the
hape same hymn sheet there I'm not sure that religion only comes from the right hemisphere
but I do think you're right that the most important parts of religious experience and practice seem
to be the consensus is seem to be underwritten by the right hemisphere the left hemisphere is
was necessary for systematizing it and turning it into a durable um phenomenon such as Christianity
or whatever it may be Islam or but but in doing so it often over legalizes makes over certain
over fixed what should be less certain more fluid more or inspiring in fact I think we've
lost the capacity for three very important things a sense of awe or wonder a sense of our own humility
and or the humility we should have and compassion and I think these are the things that
most religions that are real religions or spiritual traditions that are true spiritual
traditions have in common that they induce and re re can kindle in us a sense of wonder
they make us feel appropriately humble about what we can do and what we can know and they increase
sense of oneness with and compassion towards the rest of the created world now I think that is
is what's going wrong I think this we've completely failed to understand that religion is not
about a matter of propositional belief but dispositional belief belief is a matter of
a disposition of your your your consciousness towards the world in a certain way it's not
about propositions that you know six impossible things that you have to believe before breakfast
that's not for a relationship about and what I want to do in in my work is take people from a
standpoint where they will almost certainly be part of the the culture that believes that only
somebody rather simple or you know uneducated would think that there was a divine realm to
position where they will see that only somebody who's rather simple or uneducated would think that
would just want to rule that out I'm not saying would become suddenly religious but I think it's
extremely clear that people who either are fundamentalist religious or fundamentalist
atheists are on the wrong track and that they have more in common with one another than they
have with true believing people in any case I just think that that business of the ever-evolving
deeper relationship a loving relationship with the world in all its manifestations
is is the secret of human well-being and happiness and you say that there is now a
different religion that of economic growth and so on and I you know have quenched in myself in
the last 24 hours of it with with what you've you've said about this I find it very compelling
I'm sure you're you're broadly right and it reminds me of something that GK Chesterton said
that when people stop believing in God they don't believe in nothing they believe in anything
and that anything for them is their own power to become more and more rich powerful wealthy and
that leaves out of the count just about everything that sustains human happiness and in the seeking
for it they will never find happiness as a psychiatrist I can tell you that the most
successful people the richest people the most powerful people are not the world's happiest people
as a former high net worth stockbroker on wall street I totally concur with that assessment
so you mentioned earlier there were some previous cultures that were successful at this empathy and
compassion and a sense of you didn't mention sacred but what were the commonalities in these
societies and how did that evolve or don't we have historical data to know what happened
yes it's difficult one thing that's a surprise is that a properly functioning society in which
the two hemispheres are really working in the complementary but asymmetrical way that they
should seem to arise just like that that you think that the civilization took a very long time to
build you know but actually these civilizations just sort of seem to arise in a relatively short
time span and work well and then gradually always move further towards the right hemisphere and one
of the aspects of this is I could put it this way that the left hemisphere is always trying to
close down on a certainty but the right hemisphere is always trying to open up to a possibility
and that explains much of the difference between the way the hemisphere see the world
and in these early stages of civilization people are very open to possibility and this is a very
fruitful frame of mind they have very few sentences but they know that nothing will
prosper unless they give of themselves it's no good sitting back and waiting for it to build
itself so a civilization goes through one might say three phrases really and and and this is
being very beautifully written about by Patrick Offalls in a book called a moderate greatness
a very short book when he points out that he was on this podcast Ian oh was he oh fantastic
well he's a bit of a good friend of mine oh yeah that's great he's 90 years old and he's sharp as
attack he's just great I'm always recommending his book to people but as you know I mean he suggested
in the first phase people are very brave um they they give of themselves they're generous spirited
they create things and they defend them and so on and then there comes a period when the as
well the groundwork has been laid and now we can move on to more sophisticated things we get the
arising of philosophy and art and and so forth and that's a very benign phase but after a while
we go into a decadent phase where people just expect that this is the normal that they don't
have to do anything for it to carry on that it's their right that it is you know I'm always when
people say a right I always a little mental question where does this right come from exactly
I'm not saying that there is no use for the term right but I think it needs to be
you know thought about rather more carefully than we do anyway I think this is what happens and I can
see certainly movements in eastern civilizations which all my life have fascinated me I'm probably
a Taoist um I'm probably a Buddhist um and I'm very interested in the Vedanta
and in these traditions you see a kind of wisdom that comes from a degree of humility
of letting go of control of letting go of certain knowledge in order to attain wisdom
you know the the Tao De Ching begins with the line the Tao that can be named is not the real Tao
and you know it also contains the lines that the master does nothing but nothing is left undone
I mean that those those need to be glossed but they're really a way of saying that our obsession
with immediate action and doing and being busy and increasing our knowledge is actually a way of
stopping ourselves achieving either peace or wisdom and in the context of this conversation
I mean whether people in achieve peace for themselves it's a personal matter but if they
don't achieve some wisdom if there aren't people speaking wisely our civilization is definitely
doomed so again this is our first conversation um despite having mutual friends and mutual interest
one of the key learnings for me this past decade uh in brain research was that humans didn't evolve
to see reality um fitness at the time mattered more than than truth and I I've taught a class
at the University of Minnesota called Reality 101 a survey of the human predicament
and it's an environmental class for mostly for freshmen but can learning about reality about
the different hemispheres about our brains about supernormal stimuli and and all the different
things we inherited from our ancestors um and their interrelationships can that change
our behavior at the individual and ultimately at the couch cultural level or does it have to come
at a two-part question so my work here with this podcast is to educate and warn people about the
future that Patrick Ophels uh also believes is happening is that our energy surplus declines
and as the the carrying capacity and environmental health of our world decline we're we're in for a
tough road um so in my articulating and having conversations with you and others do the facts
matter or is it really a do we need like a new narrative of meaning of sacredness and the facts
don't matter as much that's that's a big bite what what do you think about that I think facts are
important um I think in certain areas of life claiming things to be facts needs to be carefully done
but the but we shouldn't lose the sense that there are facts I think that what science teaches us
is important very important as a road to truth I think that reason properly understood are you
not just a kind of rationalizing about things that could be done by chat GPT but I mean the fusion
of the experience of a life well lived and judgment based on that and the ability to see
things in the overall context combined with the ability to think clearly and express oneself clearly
is very important I also think that letting go of those things is important because they have
limitations they can't expect to be used to answer some of the big questions which appear
paradoxical to the left hemisphere but nonetheless are on the path to the deep realities as
Niels Bohr perhaps the greatest figure in the genesis of quantum physics said and as the great
leaders of most religious leads in the mystical traditions of most religions and spiritual pathways
have said so in the second part of the matter with things the first part I'm just looking at
really what we need to understand about the left hemisphere's incapacity to be in touch with the
real world compared with the right hemisphere now that's the reverse of what the prop psychology
thing tells us the left hemisphere may be boring and down to earth but at least it's you know it's
reliable um however that's not the case it's extremely unreliable compared with the right
hemisphere which is much more in touch with reality and a much better touchstone when we
come to decide what we should believe anyway that's part one but in part two I look at the various
pathways to truth and I say they are science reason and intuition and imagination and that
all four of these need to be brought to bear if we're going to function properly as a society and
understand who we are what we're doing here and how we are to relate to the world at large
and then in the last part of the book it's metaphysics and I look at things like
the the coincidence of opposites the one and the many but also things like time space matter
consciousness values purpose and the sense of the sacred so I'm looking at all of those things
so what I want to say is my book is based on science and on a lot of philosophizing so there's
a great deal of facts in it I quote in one book five thousand five hundred sources and in the other
about two and a half thousand so together there's a lot so I do rely on those things and I think
that our tendency to to um for example dismiss science if it happens to say things that are not
fashionable or politically correct is absolutely a disaster for us all and for science so
science is non-negotiable in that sense and although everything can you need to look at
the light in which it's interpreted but we can't do away with it so I think understanding
what is going on in our heads and how it's affecting the way we see the world is really
important and in that sense I'd go as far as to say that if we're to get out of this situation
people always say so what are we to do what are we to do and they want you know half a dozen bullet
points and are you know half a dozen bullet points that I can give but in a way they're
they're at a very low level they're like practical things that can be done now and they're not
unimportant but actually I know that unless we change the whole way we conceive what humanity
is what the world is and how the two create connect we will not get this right and it
wouldn't even matter if we did save our skins because we would not have saved our souls and
without that we would just continue being the same frustrated greedy desperate people that we
seem to be now so I think we have to see the predicament and the reason I think that I would
like as many people as possible to read and talk about my work is it's a contribution to that debate
you know that it's a really substantial thing that it costs me you know decades of my life and I
think that people are responding to it by the messages I get all the time from people saying
your your work has changed my life now if most writers if they get that once they're delighted
but I get that get that every day in fact today amongst several messages that kind of got one
that said it would be an underestimate to say that your work has changed my life so I'm not I'm
delighted always to hear this because I don't know I can only tell whether this is important from
the reactions I get from other people but I think unless you know I'm a psychiatrist and I learned
very early on that you can tell what people need to do very very early on and you can say it but
they won't do it because they need to have been brought to the place where they see for themselves
that that's what they need to do so we need to get humanity to a point where they see for themselves
that what they're doing is crazy suicidal are you taking on new patients no
no I'm 70 and I had to make a decision some time ago that you know I was going to write and
lecture rather than carry on with the day job so no I was being facetious but what you just said
rings hella true to me so I was being facetious so what I hear you saying is that science is
necessary but insufficient and that if we look at the human predicament with climate change and
population and resource depletion and everything else and if we try to construct a path through
that using only engineers and architects we will fail because we have to look at the other uh what
did you say imagination creativity you had four four categories we have to integrate all of those
intuition and imagination and I know that intuition is often a target for people in cognitive
neuroscience and of course some people have made a career out of it like Dan Kahneman and
professionally suspicious of intuition I talk about his work which is in many ways very important
in in my book the matter of things but I think that intuitions had a bad rap and because there
are certain situations which are the highly artificial in which you can show that following
your intuition won't lead to the right answer that is the flip side of the fact that we are
we are able to make very complex decisions fairly quickly using intuition although
intuition is not thinking fast sometimes intuitions are deep and take a long time to come
through and sometimes rationalizing is what we do thinking fast and quickly so you know people
sometimes say is Kahneman's you know type one thinking um the right hemisphere and type two
thinking left no if anything it would be the other way around but it's really more that
type one thinking is sub-cortical is kind of almost instinctive whereas a richer
combination of intuition and reason involves both hemispheres so it's a it's a different thing but
anyway I just wanted to put in a word for intuition because I think our willingness to um discard
discontent to and um generally despise our intuitions is one of the reasons we've become so
stupid I mean there are many things that I believe now that if there is a humanity in the future
people will look back on it as the most absurd era we are part of the most ridiculous era of
humanity in which completely improbable and very stupid things are said by highly intelligent
people and if they had any contact at all with their intuitions they would guide them to a much
much wiser place so I suspect that lots of people in our culture have trauma
we are living through an absolute crazy twilight zone sort of era a lot of people are stressed
I think intuitively the listeners and viewers of this program will agree with you that they would
like to expand or lean into their right brain more they want to be connected with the birds and the
trees and their garden and with relationships at a slower pace and they see how everything is connected
and they care like you and I do about the 10 million other species we share the planet with
but the needs of the day we have to have a job to get health insurance otherwise we go broke if we
get sick we have to build defense mechanisms against all the polarization shouting on on
YouTube and in social media are the wants of the day forcing the left brain to take over and not
allow people to reflect on the relationships between everything what what do you think about that
well let me be clear there is nothing wrong with the left hemisphere in itself
it's a very valuable servant it is the emissary to the master and as such is irreplaceable we need
it and we need the work that it can do all I'm really saying is that it must be aware that it
is a servant not the master and at the moment it thinks it's the master it thinks it has all the
answers and that's the bit that makes it a problem so I'm not saying of course I'm not and I think
I started what I've just been saying by saying that we really do need the everyday stuff we need
the jobs and we need to put in place particular measures legal measures maybe scientific plans
to try and stop the poisoning of the oceans all that all of that I agree with but what I'm really
saying is that that's not enough that's only a part of the story and and perhaps in some ways
although it sounds stupid to say this is less important than being able to see things
in a different way because if we did we wouldn't need we wouldn't need to be doing it all by
constraint and restraint we need constraints and restraints in life one of the paradoxes is that
for a society to be free it needs to observe certain restraints but when you say we need to have
um whatever it was you said mechanisms in place to sort of police the social media
if we were more aware of the shallowness as a way we talk and think so often nowadays
in sound bites and without having really thought about things deeply and probably not from a
background of humane education which is now a rarity compared with what it was 40 50 years ago
if we were aware of that there wouldn't be the need to police it in that way you know I mean
during my lifetime people have become obviously much less civilized they've become um
willing and able to treat one another with greater violence verbal physical and in other
ways so we're not we're in a realm where we're so badly dehumanized already that the only way
to help is by imposing kind of rules which in themselves constrain our better nature
as well as our unfortunate tendencies of of now so in that last bit you mentioned the word
aware or awareness four times I right now have a new coach who's an expert in something called
Feldenkrais which is awareness through movement and her advice to me is all I'm asking for you is
for awareness and once you become aware of something then for the first time you have choices
and a couple days ago she sent me this beautiful quote by Victor Frankel between stimulus and
response there is a space in that space is our power to choose our response in our response lies
our growth and our freedom so I'm just wondering how that maps if at all to the left brain right
brain story that you're unpacking is the left brain jumping into this space in our culture
and then owning the narrative in response and would more awareness kind of give us a more
merger of the two hemispheres in a healthy way what I'd certainly say is that that is a wonderful
the quote that I know from Victor Frankel who is a very very great man of course and I think that
what I'm suggesting without going one way or other on the hemispheres is that we
are too ready to jump in we have lost the art of thinking deeply of pondering of embracing silence
of thinking in a longer term over a broader span which you narrow
especially and temporally if you like in the way in which we think we're too committed to a point
of view that we may never have been taught to challenge and so forth so what I'm saying is
that we live in a society that is becoming stupid because reflective reading proper acquaintance
with history not in some ridiculous propagandizing way in which we either uncritically accept it or
uncritically despise it but in fact trying to understand the people who are not necessarily
any less wise than we were who came before us and what they created for us and what we owe to them
so not having that not having been taught to think on two sides of a question we're reacting in
two peremptory way and slowing down would be a very very fine thing most of what we do would be
better done more slowly there are very few things that are done well by just speeding them up and
yet we live in a world which is constantly demanding more and more speed less and less reflection
right and so we're compelled to use the devil's tools to do guy's work of a sort I mean I feel
that every day I mean look at us we're using you know high technology to communicate these ideas
to more people in an attempt to hopefully have people learn and slow down in their own lives
so so so getting to that one of my prior guests who I believe is a friend of yours Tomas Bjorkman
he's an advocate of nurturing inner development skills which he categorizes as being thinking
relating collaborating and and acting so do you think reflective practices and teachings such as
those can can reconnect the balancing of the two hemispheres or leaving this hemisphere's aside
just make us more holistic human beings in this time of of tumult yes I do um
um there are certain things we can't experience unless we slow down and that we must experience
when we speed up when we speed up we become fearful we become panic-stricken and I think we
should stop panicking which is not to say anything about being aware of the gravity of our situation
in fact we'll be more aware of the gravity of our situation if we stop and reflect I think we
should cultivate things like gratitude which we won't do if we're rushing through life appreciating
what we have while we still have it um appreciating silence silence is like water to me it's like some
delicious nourishing liquid I can't get enough of it it's one of the reasons I live where I do
in a rather remote part of a Scottish island and when I have to go as I quite often do back into
modern urban life I'm initially overwhelmed by its its madness I'm sure there are pockets where people
can find the necessary stillness but unless they do they're going to rush headlong to their death
so they're going to push us all over that cliff faster than ever um if we have a chance to stop
it would be a very good thing to do I think we should reconnect as I say with with the natural
world spend more time there and listen to it we should pray and meditate more and that also
means listening not talking it means adapting your ear to hear what is constantly being said to you by
by the universe by what exists we have a I'm saying everything is in relationships and
those relationships are always two-way they'll always reverberate it and we drive out what we
could learn by constantly talking and so what we need to do is to cultivate mindfulness if you like
or an attitude of prayer which which is also a matter of listening not demanding anything but
trying to reflect on what one can know in relation to spiritual values particularly
um you know and and I think so a slower culture would be a great thing and when we're actually
hurtling towards the precipice why would we try and speed it up by inventing ever more sophisticated
technology that will push us faster and faster that way is technology is just a way of giving
people power and power is neither good nor bad it depends on who's wielding it and to what end
it needs wisdom and at the moment what we're doing is we're creating very powerful mechanism
we're giving them to people who haven't any of the wisdom to use them properly and so what we need
is more wisdom not more power and I'm afraid the way we're talking at the moment it's all about
increasing our power to do things this has got us into the mess and as Einstein famously said
we don't get out of the mess by the same means that got us into it we need to be starting
to simplify I think one of your your terms is the great simplification we need to simplify
our lives our goals uh what do we expect out of life and in some way sophisticated what we
feel we can give to life I have four questions in response to what you just said my first one is
what sort of megafauna and wildlife do you have on the isle of sky what's interesting there that
you periodically or rarely see um above all we have very interesting bird life there are eagles
that nest on the mountain behind my house golden eagles we also have fish eagles we have raptors
of various kinds but we also have marsh birds we have um woodland birds um in my garden you get
garden birds so we have an extraordinarily rich panoply of of bird life um there are animals
there are deer wild deer of course on the island much of the land is cultivated where it can be
or at least given over to sheep and cattle so the kind of farm animals but there are there is a
range of wildlife as you know if you try to keep chickens as I do and and sometimes that the wild
mammalian life is not necessarily on your side or not on your chicken side anyway um so there's a
lot of that and very beautiful landscape I mean it's just um a staggering mixture of of
things that I never get used to I see it and it takes my breath away yeah I I'm blessed to live
where I do on the Mississippi River um and there are lots of wild animals here and it's my biggest
joy in life is to see something like a fox when I'm on a bike ride etc so I just wanted to ask
you that so um you talked about us uh slower culture um I agree with that um but how would
that come about it's certainly not from any top down regulations or laws or rules it almost has to
come out about from from individual humans realizing this starting to listen more starting
to focus on relationships and maybe that expands outward to a critical mass do you have any speculation
on that well I think you're exactly right that it must start with individual people but that
sounds like a very tall order when we've got to make things make things happen you know yes we're
in a crisis but we won't be so effective if we think we need to rush to make things happen
if only three percent of the population saw the kind of vision of the world the kind of
meaning in the world that I hope to unveil to readers we would automatically move not by top
down control but by an inner desire we would be led to things that I can't now specify what they
will be because they will be different from every person that is the wonderful thing about it
of something that is generated from within and goes outwards rather than something that is a
straight jacket that comes down from above and I think there's something to be said for relaxing
some of the controls because we need to learn how to discipline ourselves um the culture of
particularly my grandparents and and of my parents was so very much more one of
self-discipline and selflessness than the culture that I now inhabit and it meant that a lot of
things didn't have to be policed or ruled or legislated about in the way that they are now
of course it wasn't a perfect world I'm certainly not suggesting that for a minute
and you know in the background all sorts of things were undoubtedly going on
but the fact is that we've become morally like somebody who's decided for no very good reason
that they need a wheelchair and after they've been in the wheelchair for quite a long time
they would be much better off without the wheelchair but they can't now stand without
that wheelchair and we're like that morally speaking we need all these props and supports to
keep us on the right line but if we're to survive we need to get back to a place in which we re
integrate into our personality and into our sense of ourselves some sense of what is now
seems so old-fashioned like being a decent person like being you know an honorable person
but being magnanimous by being generous by being faithful all these things that you know we now
think we're far cleverer than that that's the kind of stuff for stupid people who don't really know
how to win we're gonna win and of course that attitude has destroyed a society that was actually
working relatively well so I think we've got to get back there the bad news is that I don't think
that's going to happen until some sort of catastrophe has happened which will insist on it that we
learn again how to look after one another in small groups to trust one another to work together to
have much simpler ambitions and and demands on the planet to be able to grow our own food
to relearn skills that our ancestors had but we thought we didn't need could we got machines
and generally I think you know people say well you know what's going to happen will life die out
I don't see any evidence that life will die out I think our way of life as it now is must die out
it can't go on and I think that a lot of humans sadly will not survive but I think that humanity
will probably survive and will be the better for it we need we're so badly adrift now that
we need something that will you know inspire us to re-embrace our deeper humanity that's
really what I'm saying well it's no wonder that you like Patrick Ophel's writing he says
very similar things and and I say very similar things you're inspiring to me this conversation
is inspiring what we're trying to do is change the initial conditions of that catastrophe or that
moment in the future so that there's a wider array of positive or more benign outcomes that happen
one of the other constraints that I that I see is there are people listening to this and nodding
their heads and saying this makes sense I want to move my life in this direction a little bit
I want to be one of those 3% but then a few hours later Candy Crush and their little social media
feeds and the things on their phone and in our our pal mel smorgasbord tech culture
virtual world shouts louder to our brains than the reality that you are describing so we get
pulled back into that vortex do you have recommendations for for people on how to how
to push that aside or how to inhibit that um that craving a little bit towards this longer
term path well I think as usual it's a matter of finding a balance but a balance that is very far
from where we are now so I think that my advice would be drastically to reduce any use of social
media whatever I don't actually use it myself at all and somebody does my publicity for me so
that's nice I can it's kind of if you like a hypocrisy for me that you know I need the message
to get out there but I don't want to be on social media however I work hard at putting the measure
out the message out there by doing things like exactly what we are doing now and some of my friends
say they can't go anywhere on the internet without bumping into me so you can't please everybody
anyway um I think grossly limiting all eliminating all together eliminating social media would be a
very good thing um perhaps limiting how much and in what way you use the internet um trying not to
fuel despair but instead to think of ways in which you can increase love and the embrace of things
that are beautiful and good and truthful and to eliminate resentment from your life and try instead
to to see what is good and and to listen to other people even if they say things very different from
you um one of the great calamities of the public debate at the moment is if we don't do a very
very simple thing then you know any therapist who's ever done couple therapy knows which is
you know you get one person talking and you say no no no let him talk and and you'll have your turn
in a minute and then at the end of that you turn to the other partner and say so what did you hear
your partner just say and and that's very instructive for everybody and if we did that more
we would get round misunderstanding because you say well actually that's what you heard me say but
that's not what I meant what I meant was this I see and then you've got a dialogue Gary but at the
moment we're just shouting one another down and and anybody who has a certain kind of opinion
which embraces many opinions that seem to me to be full of wisdom must be an outcast and so
it's an extraordinary situation in which the people that need to be heard can't speak
without being shouted down by those who are full of their own importance and narcissistically sure
that they are the good people who are fighting for the good only one thing I'd like to get across
is the idea of the dark side very important idea again in psychology everybody has a dark side and
there's a dark side to everything that we promote is good and there's a good side often to things
that we want to eliminate I mean there are certain things that are non-negotiable I agree and we're
better without them but usually it's complicated and there's good and bad mixed in most of the
things that we need to be thinking about here but anyway that's that that's the kind of advice
that I'd give embrace stillness embrace peace and and and love your friends and love nature and
and love life you know I I just started three weeks ago on the advice of another coach Silent
Saturdays where I turned my phone and computers off and it's been way more difficult than I would
have thought but that's a story for another day but I totally agree with everything you just said
another follow-up question to your previous thing that you mentioned AI again so is this
another thing that in our race to develop artificial intelligence are we in effect
hypercharging this left brain dynamic that you're talking about and further atrophying
the right brain's contribution and do you think second part of the question do you think
it's possible to create an AI or an AGI that does contain a balance of right and left brain
and and imbues more wisdom into the system or would that only happen after we changed
the goals of the system away from unbridled economic growth any any thoughts there well
I have a view that may be unpopular with some but is that when we talk of artificial intelligence
we're not really talking about intelligence at all we're talking about a following of certain
procedures that gives a simulacrum of intelligence but is not intelligence and and in some sense
that is important because I don't think that ever-increasing sophistication of AI
will will help us because it can never be wise it for that it would have to have a body it would
have to have emotions it would have to be a truly social being it would have to have empathy it
would have to have suffered I don't want to be consoled by an AI mechanism created by some clever
psychology that talks me through a crisis because I want to know that the person I'm talking to
is a fellow member of humanity that has suffered as I suffer and knows that I know that I'm going to
die so I think that is a dead end for what we need um what I worry it will do is make us think
that it's intelligent and give it more credence than it should get and even if that doesn't happen
what is very worrying is that we are seeing people and even talking more and more like
machines we're seeing people as machines we're becoming more like machines the language in
which we talk about human functions is now the language of AI one's data banks and uploading
things and in one's mind you know um and because we're in everyday life forced to interact with
incredibly stupid mechanisms that are on the internet I mean the people who used to ring up
to solve a problem weren't Einstein they probably had a fairly low IQ but in five minutes they could
sort out understand exactly what you wanted and get it done now you can spend not only a morning
but I've discovered trying to get one thing changed on Amazon a whole team of us have spent
nearly eight weeks trying to get it fixed and it's very simple we can we can do all this
you know clever stuff like create a robot that looks somewhat like a kind of an abortion of a
human being but nonetheless we can't do simple stuff and that has an immense impact on daily life
I know I haven't got much time left to live but an unreasonable amount of it is taken up in doing
procedural stuff that bulks now vastly greater in my life I mean I was just talking to my daughter
who is training as a psychotherapist and she's saying you know the trouble is I have to spend so
much time filling in things on the internet going on platforms doing this that and the other
crikey when I was training there was absolutely none of that so we've got ourselves into a really
stupid corner it's artificial stupidity that is taking us over we don't it's artificial so we
don't have to obey it we need to embrace our own capacity for wisdom which is in bringing together
intuition and imagination not fantasy but true imagination to get you into the heart of reality
our only chance of doing so along with science and reason so sorry that was a bit of a bit of a
splurge there but I think that you know it's important that we can't rely on AI for any of
these things and that the effort that goes into it would be much better put into things that are
quite practical that we could do so my contribution will be to no longer call it artificial intelligence
or AI but ASI artificial simulacrum intelligence there by naming the beast
so you mentioned imagination along with intuition and in one of your videos or something I read from
you how important is the need for the space to allow creativity in developing the health of an
individual do you have any stories of that and how does allowing that space contrast with the
expectations and trajectories that we currently put on our youth especially in the United States
context where young people get into debt and get addicted and distracted and all that do you have
any stories or on the importance of imagination and creating space I do indeed you know it's often
said that science was very creative in the period between say the 20s and the 60s or 70s but since
then what has mainly happened is technological refinements rather than real breakthroughs in science
and what happened during that period very often was that people worked either alone or in small
groups of perhaps two or three people but mainly something like the Rand corporation took bright
people gave them an office and a desk and a salary and said do whatever it is that you think is
important to do and you know there's a risk involved in that but one of the problems with our
cultures are so risk averse and if you there is a risk that somebody will abuse it but if you
don't take that risk then we're on to hiding to nothing because nothing will come of micro managing
people towards an outcome if you take creative people and tell them they've got to publish a paper
every few months explaining what they're doing they will never reach the point from which they can
actually see a picture that coheres now I've been fortunate in that I've gone into various things
quite deeply but I've also been able to see the big picture and one of the reasons why is that in
all my education from my teams onwards I was allowed an enormous amount of freedom I was expected
to work very hard at technical things at maths at you know at ancient languages and so on which
are not a piece of cake and that's fine that was part of my education but I was also left with an
immense amount of free time to read as I thought best and follow up things that I was being taught
and that went on through university and eventually ended in my getting a kind of fellowship which
a version of which still exists but I think they're trying to make it more left hemisphere I'm
afraid which is a fellowship a prize fellowship of all souls which you you got after sitting a
three-day exam if you were lucky and that gave me seven years and nobody insisted that I published
anything in fact I did publish a book about five years or so into the fellowship or maybe it was a
bit longer than that and at the time I wondered what I was doing because I was following many
things I followed science I went to philosophy seminars I found a teacher so that I could learn
Russian and it all kinds of things and then at the end of it I thought I needed to train in medicine
which I did and then in psychiatry and neuro psychiatry and all that so but that was because
I plowed a very unconventional furrow and the system was flexible enough to allow it I don't
think that system is any longer so flexible I think people will want somebody to account for
themselves all the time now the thing that's important to know is that great scientists and
mathematicians of whom I cite many examples in in the matter with things you usually found out
the great discoveries after a fallow period in which they really were either at a dead end
or they'd stopped thinking about it and their mind had moved on to something else and then
suddenly one day you know famously as as his foot you know landed on the bus the solution to
vaccine equations came to um oh god I forgot my own name now but anyway you never have your
primary so um this this freedom is really important and in retrospect for a long time I
wondered perhaps I wasted that time but now I know that I didn't waste it because it enabled me to
write books that are both deeply grounded in the kind of technical stuff but also you know spacious
enough to bring together psychology history anthropology you know with art and Persian
music and and so on and you know some people think that well that must mean that they don't
want to read it and they can't be any good because how can anybody you know seriously know anything
about all those things but fine I don't speaking to them I'm speaking to people who want to know
something that's come from you know having a lot of free time to think it's not really free
in the sense of pointless or you know it's free in the sense that I can be the decider as to what I
do so in a way though that's one linkage between your story and mine is the energy surplus of the
industrial revolution and late 20th century enabled someone like you to have the creativity in the
space to lay the foundations of writing two well three really because your last book is in two pieces
tomes on the human condition and the human brain which is kind of a product of energy surplus which
isn't going to be with us for long so this this is it this is our our species level moment to know
where to potentially know where we came from how we got here what we're doing what we really need
what the impacts are what is open to us in the future and it's it's both unbelievably tragic
and stunningly beautiful and profound at the same time you call it energy surplus which is very
much a way of thinking about it I understand that but what I would call it is a sophisticated
civilization the legacy of the Renaissance the Enlightenment Victorian hard work and that the
kind of institutions of now that are now busily trying to destroy their excellence that can provide
that um had it if you like you can call all civilization to do with a kind of energy surplus
that you know that was true in the Renaissance and so forth I understand that but it wasn't
to do with energy surplus in the sense that we mean since the industrial revolution it had very
little to do with that the kind of work I was encouraged to do and the kind of conversations I
was encouraged to have apart from the fact that they included up-to-date science were very much the
sort of continuation of a tradition of scholarship really and and we seem to have turned our backs
on that except in some rather wonderful places where people are now starting up colleges that
really are serious about learning in a broad sense and and and you know not just passing on
propaganda but actually enabling people to think freely and in a balanced way about the predicament
we find ourselves in so that's a good sign there are good signs I mean one of the things that really
encourages me is the number of young people who write to me often scientists and say this stuff
that you're writing is so fantastic and I'm starting to do a project on this and can you
advise and so on which usually I can't but nonetheless the enthusiasm for it is extremely
important to me and gives me hope for the future I I agree with that I get I get similar
feedback all the time I want to be respectful of your time but I do have some some closing
questions that I ask all my viewers but before that a building on what you just said
how would you in a perfect world redesign the education system if if you were in charge
so that you would take into account a lot of the the wisdom and and the science that you've
discovered over decades towards better preparing young human beings towards the future of the 21st
century to be you know left brain right brain more balanced to be slower to spend time in nature
to meditate what would you do to change the education system because in my view the education
system itself has become a out of control super organism that feeds on its own demands etc well
in in in short I'd re humanize it and the emphasis only on stem subjects is a product of this
feeling that we need to increase productivity but that will get us nowhere on its own we desperately
need to have intelligent knowledgeable human beings who who are aware of the culture that to
which they owe so much and are not taking a sledgehammer to it and and so I would reintroduce
the humanities including some emphasis on on music on drama on poetry and on philosophy in the sense
that there are different ways in history of thinking about things and to see some of them
you'll think like this and to see others you'd think like that and thus broadening people's
horizons and seeing that there are you know there are often many sides to any one question I think
that would be a very important thing I think that young people should be taught mindfulness
in school from an early age I think the whole rhetoric of mechanistic determinism should not
be the assumed model for the cosmos and that really means introducing I don't know how it
would best be done but something of spirituality again into the into the curriculum the exact
thousand wherefores are not for me to stay but I think that that would be good I also think that
emphasis on the being right answers in exams rather than demonstrating intelligent thinking
you know that that should be played down you know there are ways in which you can be wrong
but have given a fantastically interesting answer to a question whereas somebody else who just
you know follows everyone else and says the right thing may have been very
unintelligent in their response so I that's the way I'd look at it we need to be freer we need to
trust we need to trust teachers for god's sake we need to trust university lectures we need to
trust doctors we need to you know we we shouldn't be telling them all the time how to do that
let's managerialize out of existence I mean who'd want to be a teacher now who'd want to be a doctor
you know it is a reality that started in the in the in the 80s that managers started to tell
doctors how to do their job well and and there are more of them now than the doctors and they're
better paid than the doctors and their culture is a nonsense because it you know it's not the
culture that you work extremely hard to have the experience and knowledge of a doctor can be and
the same is true of a teacher a teacher makes a gift of a relationship with a child the people
who really taught me anything we're on fire with the thing is that it that inspired them and they
communicated that spark to me and it might not have been on the curriculum but I will remember
it all my life we've turned the planet into a business as a species and I agree with you regarding
teaching I may have no money at all but it was the most rewarding thing I've ever done with these
17 18 19 year olds um yeah ancient wisdom from my understanding in India have long known about the
brain hemispheres just a penultimate question here from a western medical and psychological
perspective are there specific practices recommended for rebalancing the hemispheres you
mentioned a few of them earlier but could the wisdom of the eastern religions you mentioned
Taoism Buddhism be integrated with the modern imbalance of the west and how would that come
about well absolutely the people just need to acquaint themselves with this and at school I
got to know Heraclitus and I thought he was far more interesting than Plato and then about 20 I
read Alan Watts's Tao the watercourse way and that reconnected me with the pre-socratic philosophers
like Heraclitus and it was another you know life-changing moment when I read that book and
since then Taoism has always been part of my thinking so people people can start by picking up books
but it's not about reading a book it's like you can't learn to swim by reading a book about it you
need to get in the water and do it and you can't actually experience what people mean by religious
religious life by simply reading about it you have to start committing yourself to something
so that's a very important insight on how this sort of thing works but what I would say is that
I've mentioned already things like mindfulness which is almost the clearest example I can give
of recruiting the right hemisphere and trying to silence the ever chattering ever judgmental
left hemisphere and allowing things as Heidegger says to presence before us rather than simply be
represented in our minds so that's a good thing and the arts in general as I say but also leading a
certain kind of life and the ambition to lead that life being put into children at school
and it's not a fix it's not something they can get tomorrow but they need to begin to start the
steps on a journey that will be a lifelong journey that will take them ever deeper into a
country they need to know and where they belong so it's about it's about changing the way we
think about everything's got to be a quick fix and there's got to be an answer and a test to
make sure people have got it and all that but that is really beside what I'm talking about
I just want to say can I say add this that it's not just it's not just the eastern religions that
seem to show an understanding of the relationship between the hemispheres and I quote you know the
Daodu Jing and and I quote the Yi Qing and all these things in the book because they have
extraordinary insights into the relationship between the hemispheres as soon as you know about
you can see that they intuited this without having brain scanners but the most remarkable
example is a story by the Onondaga people who are part of the Iroquois nation and I tell it at
you know some length it's the first six pages of part three of the book it's absolutely staggering
I can't tell it now but these people intuited exactly the relationship between the hemispheres
and what was going to happen when the the brother as they call the two brothers with one brother who
doesn't know as much as the other when that brother starts to take control so I mean they saw they
foresaw all of this anyway sorry that was just an addendum to my answer homo sapiens clever but
seldom wise um so you've you've talked about culture and you've talked about from the perspective
of education system but what about young humans specifically do you have any recommendations
for 18 to 25 year old human beings around the world who are aware of climate change and resource
depletion and polarization in our economy and the constraints to the human enterprise that are
listening to this and nodding their heads agreeing with the wisdom that you're sharing what what
advice do you have for young humans not to be afraid to trust their intuitions but to question them
as you question everything everything you're told without necessarily that leading to your
dismissing it but just making sure that you've seen both sides of everything um taking strength from
a spiritual tradition knowing the works in it belonging to it nourishing your soul at
the fount of art and music dedicating yourself to practical good works either locally or as part
of an organization that you admire as long as you still are in it and continue to admire it
there can come a time when you may decide it happens so often in institutions as it's become
more of a barrier to achieving its original aim than it is promoting it as William James said
already in the 19th century um uh not necessarily believing everything that experts tell you but
at least while you're young thinking it's quite a good idea to listen to what experts say about this
um with time you may see what you can you know what of that that quote wisdom was really wisdom
and what wasn't and and act appropriately believe in the power of humanity to surprise us
you know there was homo habilis and there is homo sapiens clever homo wise homo and you know
we are supposed to do that homo sapiens but we have it in us to be wise in a way that no other
creature can be wise that wisdom is the product of hard work long self-discipline and immersion
in the glorious business of life and it lies the other side of knowledge so there's ignorance on
one side of knowledge and there's a kind of unknowing which is wise on the other side and it has
nothing to do with ignorance it's where you are in the position to be wise and so all of these
things are part of a long narrative that may be frustrating to a young person who wants
wisdom now but wisdom cannot be had now but you won't get it unless you make the investments in it
now so the start of life is making investments in becoming a certain kind of person over time
and society should encourage those steps and not say the only way forward for you is to work in some
vast organization in which you have no no say no no ability to use your own initiative I think we
should you know look at it organizations and a healthy one is one in which as far as possible
initiative and freedom to act are passed down the tree there's got to be some upper control I
understand that but as far as possible to let people manage intelligently what they're dealing with
and be answerable for it and be dismissed if they've done a bad job but to take part in a life which
is not just being embedded in the kind of organizations that now so many people will end up going into
and and you know dare to be different but it's going to be hard work you know I dared to be
different I gave up a promising academic career in order to start being a medical student when I
was in my early 30s and already had a couple of children under the age of three so I didn't know
whether I was more insomniac when I was working 120 hours a week in the hospital which in those days
was legal it isn't now or at home so you know you live dangerously I've lived dangerously but you
also need to work very very hard but if you can be prepared to work hard be honest to yourself be
honorable to yourself and to others to be to be you know inspired by by some goal that seems you
real and valuable that is a loving goal not just a selfish goal then go for it go for it and you
know may god be with you that's all I can say and I hope you will because you know the future depends
on people like you doing that I always dared to be different but I'm in my mid 50s right now and
I'm firstly now investing in the things that will bring me wisdom and I wish I had started that 30
years ago when I was in my 20s I was I was much more left-brained yeah no I believe that what
do you care most about in the world Ian? It's a very difficult thing to to say because I
I just care about the world really you know but I care about it under the aspect of love
I care about real love continuing and prospering and spreading
I can't say better than that that's ultimately what life's about you can do anything you can be
anything but if you don't experience love and you don't do in your own way what seems to you
to be the loving thing then I'm not sure what point life has I'm sounding a bit like some fool here
never a man I particularly have found on my wavelength but there we are but I'm sure he was
very wise and right about many things. Is love a product of both the left and right hemispheres?
It's much bigger than either hemisphere it comes from somewhere very deep
below the hemispheres I believe and it takes the whole body and it takes the whole of the
embodied being their heart their gut literally and their brain their soul their spirit their
intelligence their everything. If you could wave a magic wand even though we know those don't exist
and there was no personal recourse to your decision what is one thing one thing that you would do to
improve human and planetary futures? It is again almost impossible to say
and one of the reasons this is of course it can't happen and one's constrained by what can happen but
I think bringing back into our lives that those things that I talked about of humility and and
or if people could be made to experience those things on the daily basis if scientists could
realize that they don't know so very much it's wonderful that they know what they know and that
I'm with them every inch of the way in the work that it's done but that really as William James said
ignorance is an ocean what we know is just a drop and that you know that that's how we are and if
if we had that sense before the world and we had the sense of awe and wonder in it we would behave
well to it and to one another in that aspect of love that I've described that's all I can say.
So are you still writing is this going to be a trilogy maybe the last book will be how the
emissary relinquished the things? I won't be doing any more big books I don't have the energy
all the time but I might write a few short books I've just been reminded yesterday by Oxford
University Press that I promised them a book many years ago which would be a kind of intellectual
autobiography I hope a short one I'd quite like to write a short book of things I'd like to say to
my younger self or to people who are growing now about the world and it will have no footnotes
and no bibliography and it will be no more than a hundred pages probably much less
and the other thing I've promised for a long time to write and I would very much enjoy is a
book on the art created by psychotic subjects I've collected some from patients of mine I
was fortunate enough to work at the Bethlehem Royal Hospital the most ancient mental hospital in the
world founded in the late 14th century and it has a magnificent museum of works done by
some of its patients some of them quite well known and I've always found it utterly fascinating
and I'd like to write a relatively short monograph illustrated with some of these works
because I think people would find it intriguing as I do this has been a great conversation
it's been inspiring to me and I'm glad that we met after all this time and and hope we can
continue a conversation thank you for your lifetime of work and and for your time today
Dr. Ian McElchrist thank you very much Nate and I too have found it thoroughly enjoyable talking
with you if you enjoyed or learned from this episode of The Great Simplification please
subscribe to us on your favorite podcast platform and visit TheGreatSimplification.com
for more information on future releases